<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>To William Bird</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="preface" epub:type="preface z3998:letter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To William Bird</h2>
			<p epub:type="z3998:salutation">My dear Bird⁠—</p>
			<p>I have always held⁠—and I hold as strongly now as ever⁠—that a novel should have no preface. It should have no preface for aesthetico-moral reasons, and because prefatory matter takes away from the reality of, and therefore damages, a book. A dedicatory letter is subterfuge. That subterfuge I feel forced to adopt, and must take the consequences.</p>
			<p>The reason is this: All novels are historical, but all novels do not deal with such events as get on to the pages of history. This <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">No More Parades</i> does. It becomes, therefore, necessary to delimit what, in it, is offered as, on the author’s responsibility, observed event.</p>
			<p>State, underline and emphasize the fact how you will it is impossible to get into the heads of even intelligent public critics the fact that the opinions of a novelist’s characters as stated in any novel are not of necessity the opinions of the novelist. It cannot be done. How it may be with one’s public one has no means of knowing. Perhaps they read one with more generosity and care. Presumably they do, for they have either spent money on, or taken some trouble to obtain, the volume.</p>
			<p>In this novel the events, such as it treats of, are vouched for by myself. There was in France, at the time covered by this novel, an immense base camp, unbelievably crowded with men whom we were engaged in getting up the line, working sometimes day and night in the effort. That immense army was also extremely depressed by the idea that those who controlled it overseas would⁠—I will not use the word “betray,” since that implies volition⁠—but “let us down.” We were oppressed, ordered, counter-ordered, commanded, countermanded, harassed, strafed, denounced⁠—and, above all, dreadfully worried. The never-ending sense of worry, in fact, far surpassed any of the “exigencies of troops actually in contact with enemy forces,” and that applied not merely to the bases, but to the whole field of military operations. Unceasing worry!</p>
			<p>We took it out in what may or may not have been unjust suspicions of the all-powerful ones who had our lives in their hands⁠—and seemed indifferent enough to the fact. So this novel recounts what those opinions were: it does not profess to dictate whether those opinions were or were not justified. There is, I think, not one word in it which records any opinions or words of mine as being my words or opinions. I believe I may say that, as to the greater part of such public matters as are here discussed, I have no opinions at all. After seven or eight years I have been unable to form any. I present therefore only what I observed or heard.</p>
			<p>Few writers can have engaged themselves as combatants in what, please God, will yet prove to be the war that ended war, without the intention of aiding with their writings, if they survived, in bringing about such a state of mind as should end wars as possibilities.</p>
			<p>This obviously is a delicate task. If you overstate horrors you induce in your reader a state of mind such as, by reaction, causes the horrors to become matters of indifference. If you overstate heroisms you induce indifference to heroisms⁠—of which the late war produced, heaven knows, plenty enough, so that to be indifferent to them is villainy. Casting about, then, for a medium through which to view this spectacle, I thought of a man⁠—by then dead⁠—with whom i had been very intimate and with whom⁠—as with yourself⁠—I had at one time discussed most things under the sun. He was the English Tory.</p>
			<p>Even then⁠—it must have been in September, 1916, when I was in a region called the Salient, and I remember the very spot where the idea came to me⁠—I said to myself: “How would all this look in the eyes of X⁠⸺”⁠—already dead, along with all English Tories? For, as a medium through which to view struggles that are after all in the end mostly emotional struggles⁠—since as a rule for every twenty minutes of actual fighting you were alone with your emotions, which, being English, you did not express, for at least a month!⁠—as a medium, what could be better than the sceptical, not ungenerous, not cold, not unconvincible eyes of an extinct frame of mind? For by the time of my relative youth when I knew X⁠⸺ so intimately, Toryism had gone beyond the region of any practising political party. It said for a year or two: “A plague on all your houses,” and so expired.</p>
			<p>To this determination⁠—to use my friend’s eyes as a medium⁠—I am adhering in this series of books. <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Some Do Not⁠ ⁠…</i>⁠—of which this one is not so much a continuation as a reinforcement⁠—showed you the Tory at home during wartime; this shows you the Tory going up the line. If I am vouchsafed health and intelligence for long enough I propose to show you the same man in line and in process of being reconstructed.</p>
			<p>There is nothing more to it: I no more back the political opinions of General Campion than those of Sylvia Tietjens, who considered that the World War was just an excuse for male apagemones; I no more accept responsibility for the inaccuracies of Tietjens quoting King’s Regulations than for the inaccuracies of the general in quoting <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Henry <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span></i>. I was roundly taken to task by the only English critic whose review of my last book I read⁠—after he had <em>horribly</em> misrepresented the plot of the work at a crucial point⁠—for <em>my</em> inaccuracy in stating that poor Roger Casement was shot. As a matter of fact, I had been struck by the fact that a lady with whom I had been discussing Casement twice deliberately referred to the shooting of Casement, and stated that she did so because she could not bear to think that we had hanged him. In making therefore a lady⁠—who had loved Casement⁠—refer to his execution in the book in question, I let her say that Casement was shot⁠ ⁠… Indeed, I should prefer to think that he had been shot, myself⁠ ⁠… Or still more to think that we had allowed him to escape, or commit suicide, or be imprisoned during His Majesty’s pleasure⁠ ⁠… The critic preferred to rub in his hanging. It is a matter of relative patriotism.</p>
			<p>Whilst we are chipping, I may as well say that I have been informed that a lively controversy has raged over the same work in the United States, a New York critic having stated that I was a disappointed man intent on giving a lurid picture of present-day matrimonial conditions in England. I hope I am no rabid patriot, but I pray to be preserved from the aspiration of painting any nation’s lurid matrimonial conditions. The peculiar ones alumbrated in <i>Some Do Not⁠ ⁠…</i> were suggested by the fate of a poor fellow living in a place in the south of France in which I happened to be stopping when I began the book. His misfortunes were much those of my central character, but he drank himself to death, it was said deliberately, after he had taken his wife back. He came from Philadelphia.</p>
			<p>So, in remembrance of our joint labours and conspiracies, and in token of my admiration for your beautiful achievements in another art,</p>
			<p>I subscribe myself, my dear Bird,</p>
			<footer>
				<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">Your humble, obedient and obliged</p>
				<p epub:type="z3998:signature">
					<abbr class="name">F. M. F.</abbr>
				</p>
				<p><b>Paris</b>, 31 <i>October</i> ’24⁠–⁠<br/>
				<b>Guermantes</b>, 25 <i>May</i>, ’25.</p>
			</footer>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
